Okay, let's get started.
NOTE CONF
Um, don't forget to sign up for book club.
Uh, it's a different barcode every time.
NOTE CONF
So if you could just scan the barcode for the
interactive elements of the lecture.
NOTE CONF
While you do that, I can tell you roughly what
today's lecture will be about.
NOTE CONF
It will be about language.
Uh, so, as I said, there will be several large
NOTE CONF
themes in the course.
So that includes language, but later on also vision, memory,
NOTE CONF
Various aspects of neural cognition.
And we'll start with the language.
NOTE CONF
So we saw yesterday a sort of general introduction to
various themes in cognitive science.
NOTE CONF
In particular we talked about modelling, but then we also
talked about this question of whether our cognitive faculties are
NOTE CONF
innate or to what extent they are innate rather than
acquired or learned.
NOTE CONF
And this is a question that looms large when it
comes to language as well.
NOTE CONF
We saw yesterday a bit of evidence about a critical
period for language acquisition.
NOTE CONF
That would be evidence that the maintenance camp normally sites
as an argument for maintenance.
NOTE CONF
But we'll see other evidence.
And today we'll talk about language as a system.
NOTE CONF
If you if you're studying linguistics or you've taken a
linguistics class already, then this will all seem very familiar.
NOTE CONF
But obviously I'm not assuming that.
So I'm introducing some basic concepts, in particular words and
NOTE CONF
rules and how they interact.
And then in the next lecture on Tuesday, we're going
NOTE CONF
to talk about language acquisition specifically and what kind of
aspects of language acquisition acquisition we would like to model.
NOTE CONF
So there we're going to talk about things like regular
versus irregular verbs and how this sort of system can
NOTE CONF
be acquired during acquisition and so on.
And after that we'll look at modelling.
NOTE CONF
This is the first modelling part which will be about
neural network modelling.
NOTE CONF
That will take us 2 or 3 lectures.
And then we'll apply this to language acquisition.
NOTE CONF
So we'll introduce a neural network model of language acquisition.
That will not be until lecture three.
NOTE CONF
But that's sort of the overall game plan for the
first part of the course.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So let's get started with language.
NOTE CONF
Words and rules are the most important components I'll talk
about.
NOTE CONF
And then I'll talk about anatomy of language more generally.
And also how this relates to the anatomy of cognition
NOTE CONF
and in wider terms, just beyond language.
Okay, so what is the word?
NOTE CONF
This is a fairly intuitive thing.
And you have seen written words.
NOTE CONF
Heard spoken words.
Um, a linguist would define it abstractly as an association
NOTE CONF
between, uh, form and meaning.
So typically a spoken form such as rose would be
NOTE CONF
associated with the certain meaning referring to objects that look
roughly like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we'll come back to meaning actually later in this
course.
NOTE CONF
At the moment, let's just say there's this arbitrary association.
Typically you would have other properties.
NOTE CONF
You would know that it's a noun.
For example, you know, the part of speech.
NOTE CONF
You would know, for example, that it's um, a concrete
object rather than an abstract noun, like, I don't know,
NOTE CONF
democracy or something like that.
Um, so somehow the language community, in this case, speakers
NOTE CONF
of English, they have agreed on mapping this particular set
of phonemes rose onto this particular object, and this is
NOTE CONF
conventional.
This is arbitrary.
NOTE CONF
The rose doesn't really.
The word rose doesn't really smell like a rose, or
NOTE CONF
looks like a rose, or have thorns and so on.
It's a conventional pairing.
NOTE CONF
And you might say, well, but what about words like
oink and crash that sound a bit like the thing
NOTE CONF
that they're describing or sound symbolism?
Things like mellifluous or rancorous, which also symbolise a little
NOTE CONF
bit what they are denoting.
Sure, these pockets exist in the lexicon.
NOTE CONF
There are some, uh, omnium onomatopoeia, as it's called, and
some sound symbolism, but most words are not like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we'll ignore this for the for the purposes
of this, this lecture.
NOTE CONF
This all goes back to the sorcerer, who was a
Swiss linguist and who came up with this idea of
NOTE CONF
the arbitrary sine, the arbitrary pairing between a sequence of
letters or a sequence of phonemes and, uh, a concept,
NOTE CONF
a meaning.
And if we look at the overall set of all
NOTE CONF
these pairings, then this is called the mental lexicon.
It's a bit like a dictionary, right?
NOTE CONF
It lists words and meanings, but we're talking about the
way this is stored in the cognitive system ultimately in
NOTE CONF
in neural tissue in the brain okay.
So this is called the mental lexicon.
NOTE CONF
And we'll talk a little bit about how this is
different or similar compared to a dictionary.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Something that a linguist would come up with.
NOTE CONF
Often the structure is actually assumed to be a hierarchy
or network, rather than just a simple list.
NOTE CONF
Alphabetical list of words or something like that.
And also you can then define a language as.
NOTE CONF
A system where two speakers can understand each other because
the lexical entries are the same or at least intelligible
NOTE CONF
to each other.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Obviously you have different dialects, different accents, different variants of
of of a language.
NOTE CONF
But if there's enough lexical overlap, then the speakers can
understand each other.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's here's an example.
And this is actually taken from the AI literature.
NOTE CONF
This is something called WordNet which is a lexical hierarchy.
So it's a type of a lexicon not necessarily a
NOTE CONF
mental lexicon, but something that is not just a list
of words like in the dictionary.
NOTE CONF
And you can see certain interesting things.
So first of all, it's organised as a tree Essentially.
NOTE CONF
And you have general concepts here like animal or artefact
up here.
NOTE CONF
And then animal will be subdivided into, uh, vertebrate, aquatic
vertebrate, aquatic invertebrate and so on.
NOTE CONF
Vertebrate would be bird, mammal and mammal with the human,
mouse and sperm whale and a lot of other mammals.
NOTE CONF
And actually a group of linguists have sat down and
painfully constructed this hierarchy for basically all the nouns and
NOTE CONF
verbs of English.
So it contains tens of thousands of words ordered in
NOTE CONF
this hierarchy.
And you can see various interesting things.
NOTE CONF
So first of all, it's not really a tree.
It's multiple trees.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the artefact hierarchy is different from the animal hierarchy.
NOTE CONF
And they're not connected.
Um, you can have ambiguity for example here mouse this
NOTE CONF
is the mammal.
And this is another mouse which is the device computer
NOTE CONF
mouse.
And so that is a feature of the mental lexicon,
NOTE CONF
of course, as well that there's ambiguities.
What kind of more than one meaning you can have
NOTE CONF
cross classification here.
The whale here is both a fish and a mammal.
NOTE CONF
So it's it's actually a graph rather than tree, the
structure that's underlying.
NOTE CONF
And a lot of the cognitive literature assumes that the
mental lexicon is organised into something like that.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Either a graph or a tree or a hierarchy.
NOTE CONF
It's not just a list.
And in particular, words that are similar in meaning are
NOTE CONF
close together.
So here are all the all the mammals are close
NOTE CONF
together.
Then all the fish are close together.
NOTE CONF
Here are the artefacts.
They sit in a similar part of the hierarchy and
NOTE CONF
so on.
And this is actually a very important observation because it
NOTE CONF
influences, for example, how we access the lexicon, right?
If we access car, then we can access aircraft as
NOTE CONF
well.
Because they're both vehicles, they're both artefacts and so on.
NOTE CONF
They're semantically similar.
And we'll come back to that.
NOTE CONF
We'll come back to that.
When we talk about semantic similarity in, I think it's
NOTE CONF
week four.
And we'll come back to that in the second part
NOTE CONF
of the course, where we'll actually see an example of
how the mental lexicon maps onto the organisation of the
NOTE CONF
cortex.
Right?
NOTE CONF
The the neural structure of the brain turns out to
be mapped in a similar way, where words that have
NOTE CONF
a similar meaning are close together also in terms of
which neurones they're stored in, in the brain.
NOTE CONF
So the the way things are organised matters.
This is just an example of how this can be
NOTE CONF
conceptualised.
There's other interesting things about the mental lexicon if we
NOTE CONF
think now, not about the structure.
So this is about the structure of the mental lexicon,
NOTE CONF
how it's organised, which was a close together, which was
related and so on.
NOTE CONF
But now how do we use the mental lexicon?
How do we use it to recognise words, to produce
NOTE CONF
words, to put them together into sentences and so on.
So first of all, we need to learn these words,
NOTE CONF
right?
So even if we're Chomsky and we believe that language
NOTE CONF
is innate in some form, nobody would claim that the
lexicon is innate, right?
NOTE CONF
You grew up speaking English or Mandarin, sometimes both.
But it's clear that the lexicon is different and it's
NOTE CONF
not something that would that would be innate.
Otherwise, why would you?
NOTE CONF
You wouldn't learn it during, you know, you'd spend the
first ten, 15 years of, of your life learning the
NOTE CONF
lexicon and the other structures of the language.
And this is, of course, something you can quantify And
NOTE CONF
estimates are that you learn about 40,000 words between birth
and adulthood.
NOTE CONF
And, um, so that's a lot of stuff.
And interestingly, this doesn't happen all at once or in
NOTE CONF
a it also doesn't happen all at the same speed,
but initially.
NOTE CONF
So for the first 12 months, babies don't speak right.
They might understand to some extent, but they're not going
NOTE CONF
to speak.
So they start speaking between 12 and 18 months, and
NOTE CONF
then once they reach a milestone of about two years,
then they suddenly start learning lots and lots and lots
NOTE CONF
of words very quickly.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is sometimes called the vocabulary explosion or the vocabulary
growth spurt.
NOTE CONF
And that's something we'll come back to next week.
Um, and after that, language acquisition slows down, or at
NOTE CONF
least word acquisition slows down.
While these growth spurt happens, though, often a single exposure
NOTE CONF
to a word is enough to learn it.
So somehow we have a very efficient mechanism for learning
NOTE CONF
words, at least at this particular age, and we end
up learning lots of words.
NOTE CONF
40,000.
That's what the estimate is here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
This is what I've just said, this vocabulary explosion that
NOTE CONF
happens during the second year after birth, roughly between, let's
say, 18 and 30 months, something like that.
NOTE CONF
Then if we think about how we use words, right,
we we hear a word.
NOTE CONF
If someone speaks to us or several words or we
read a word on the page, then we need to
NOTE CONF
access it in the mental lexicon.
Otherwise we don't know the meaning.
NOTE CONF
We don't know what part of speech we're dealing with.
We don't know how to fit this in in the
NOTE CONF
rest of the sentence and so on.
So we need to access the mental lexicon somehow.
NOTE CONF
And here the estimate is that this happens really quickly.
It takes about 200 milliseconds.
NOTE CONF
So this is, you know, a fifth of a second.
So it's a really fast process.
NOTE CONF
And then the estimate is if you, um, if you
retrieve, if you read or hear a word and then
NOTE CONF
retrieve that meaning, and then also you're asked to name
it.
NOTE CONF
This is a common task that psycho linguists use.
They show you a word and they ask you to
NOTE CONF
name it, or they show you a picture and name
the and ask you to name the object.
NOTE CONF
And so you take about a quarter of a second
to name the object, and then a quarter, another quarter
NOTE CONF
second to, uh, to do the motor actions that are
required.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because speaking of course, means that you need to send
NOTE CONF
a motor signal to your tongue, you need to modulate
your breathing and so on.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of other stuff going on when you
want to speak.
NOTE CONF
So.
And cognitive scientists are, of course, interested in studying all
NOTE CONF
these different phases.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Recognising the the words, let's say there's a picture of
a rose Then retrieving the word rose from from the
NOTE CONF
mental lexicon.
And then, if you're supposed to speak it.
NOTE CONF
Uh, programming your articulatory system to produce the sound rose.
Okay, so this is all things that people have tried
NOTE CONF
to measure.
But quickly, back to to word learning.
NOTE CONF
So this is a graph that was taken from a
standard data set where you have the productive vocabulary on
NOTE CONF
on the y axis.
So how many words can the child produce.
NOTE CONF
And then you have the age here in months on
on the x axis.
NOTE CONF
And you have different quantiles.
Let's look at the green line which is the quantile
NOTE CONF
the fifth quantile, the 50th quantile anyway where that's basically
half the children.
NOTE CONF
So at the age of 16 months, which is a
year and a year and three months, they are only
NOTE CONF
able to produce, I don't know, 5 or 10 words
or something like that.
NOTE CONF
But then things accelerate pretty quickly and then by the
time they're two years old here, they already produce just
NOTE CONF
over 300 words.
And then by, uh, by the time they're two and
NOTE CONF
a half, they reached just under 600 words.
And some some kids here in the upper quantiles, they're
NOTE CONF
even beyond 600.
So, um, the dots, by the way, are individual, individual
NOTE CONF
measurements, individual children at particular ages.
So what we can see is that this is a
NOTE CONF
process that basically if you look at the blue curve
or here, the green curve accelerates really, really quickly.
NOTE CONF
And this is why we end up with the 40,000
words that we we learn ultimately.
NOTE CONF
And later in the course we'll talk about the mechanisms
that underlie this.
NOTE CONF
How is it possible to learn so quickly?
It's a tremendous feat.
NOTE CONF
Children in this age, they you know, they also learn
other stuff.
NOTE CONF
For example, they learn how to how to walk.
At about 12 months, they learn social interaction.
NOTE CONF
They learn things like gaze following.
How do all of these things interact, uh, to produce
NOTE CONF
this vocabulary, uh, vocabulary explosion.
So this is something we'll come back to.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So but words are of course, not everything.
NOTE CONF
We don't talk in isolated words.
I mean, obviously we can have utterances like stop or
NOTE CONF
no that are just a single word, but most utterances
are not like that.
NOTE CONF
They're long and complicated and contain multiple phrases that are
nested with each other and so on.
NOTE CONF
So most speech is is not isolated words.
So we can combine them into phrases.
NOTE CONF
So a phrase would be something like the blue dog.
Or, uh, learning to fly.
NOTE CONF
Um, so combinations of words that belong together.
And then we combine those phrases into sentences.
NOTE CONF
Right.
A sentence normally has at least a noun phrase and
NOTE CONF
a verb phrase.
So something like Peter and Mary, where Peter is a
NOTE CONF
noun phrase and Mary would be a verb phrase.
And the question is how do these combinations work?
NOTE CONF
And in particular, then how do we compute the meaning
of a sentence based on the words and their combination,
NOTE CONF
the way they are arranged?
And if we think about this for a moment.
NOTE CONF
So here are three different sentences.
The boy saw the girl with a telescope.
NOTE CONF
The girl saw the telescope with the boy.
The boy with the telescope saw the girl.
NOTE CONF
These all contain the same words, right?
They are arranged in a different order.
NOTE CONF
Do they mean the same thing or do they mean
different things?
NOTE CONF
What is it?
They all mean different things.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So here the boy sees the girl.
NOTE CONF
Here the girl sees the telescope.
And here the telescope is somehow associated with the girl.
NOTE CONF
All with the seeing.
And here the boy is associated with the telescope.
NOTE CONF
And here the telescope is associated with the boy, and
so on.
NOTE CONF
So they're all different in terms of the meaning.
And we can create these differences just by shuffling the
NOTE CONF
words.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We keep the words the same.
We just change the order and we get a different
NOTE CONF
meaning.
So that means that we can combine words into phrases
NOTE CONF
and phrases into sentences.
And how we do that really matters for the message
NOTE CONF
that we're trying to convey.
So let's try to understand that a little bit more.
NOTE CONF
So this set of rules that are used to.
Combine words and and construct sentences is sometimes called a
NOTE CONF
grammar.
And here we'll briefly introduce it by a particular kind
NOTE CONF
of formalism.
For a modelling grammar it's called the context free grammar.
NOTE CONF
And you can think of the context free grammar as
a set of rules that are written as little trees.
NOTE CONF
So you can have trees like this with which indicates
that rows is a noun.
NOTE CONF
So you have the part of speech here, and then
you have the lexical item here a is a determiner.
NOTE CONF
Determiner is a type of article, is is a is
a verb.
NOTE CONF
And so you have these very simple grammar rules.
And you can think of them as trees.
NOTE CONF
Well trees with only one branch, right.
In this case.
NOTE CONF
But we can have more complicated trees like this.
This is a noun phrase and P stands for noun
NOTE CONF
phrase.
And the noun phrase consists of a determiner and a
NOTE CONF
noun.
So determiner is something like a or the a noun
NOTE CONF
would be something like rose or dog.
A verb phrase contains a verb and a noun phrase.
NOTE CONF
Note that this is the same noun phrase as here,
right?
NOTE CONF
So you can have, uh, phrases constructed out of phrases,
or you can have a sentence which consists of a
NOTE CONF
noun phrase on the verb phrase.
And again, these combination rules here are written as little
NOTE CONF
trees.
And now we already have a grammar.
NOTE CONF
And we can actually construct a lot of sentences already
with this, uh, six rule grammar.
NOTE CONF
And how do we do this?
Well, we use a process called parsing.
NOTE CONF
Parsing is basically technically it's taking a sentence and applying
a grammar to construct a representation for the sentence.
NOTE CONF
So let's take this really simple sentence A rose is
a rose.
NOTE CONF
We only have one noun, right?
So rose occurs twice.
NOTE CONF
Then we start with these rules here.
These are sometimes called lexical rules, right.
NOTE CONF
They have the lexical item and then the part of
speech.
NOTE CONF
So A is a terminal rose is a noun, is
is a verb, the other a is a determiner again,
NOTE CONF
and then the next rose is also noun.
So we start basically bottom up, sometimes called bottom up
NOTE CONF
parsing, and assign a rule to each of the lexical
items, which tells us which part of speech we're using.
NOTE CONF
And then we can use these rules here.
The the rules that don't have lexical items in them,
NOTE CONF
the phrasal rules and construct these phrases.
So this becomes a noun phrase determiner noun combined to
NOTE CONF
a noun phrase.
Same here.
NOTE CONF
It's a noun phrase.
And then we can use this rule here and combine
NOTE CONF
the verb and the noun phrase into a verb phrase.
And finally, this use.
NOTE CONF
This rule here can combine the determiner so the noun
phrase and the verb phrase into a sentence.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so now we have a complete tree for a
sentence.
NOTE CONF
And in order to we know that we're finished because
we have one tree that spans the whole input, all
NOTE CONF
the words in the sentence, and it ends in S,
it generates a sentence.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And now you can imagine that this works for a
NOTE CONF
simple sentence like a rose is a rose.
But for more complicated sentence you need a lot more
NOTE CONF
rules.
You need more lexical items, you need more ways to
NOTE CONF
combine them, and so on.
Okay, but in principle, this is a very general and
NOTE CONF
very powerful mechanism that you can use to construct a
sentence sentence structures.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's actually look at this a little bit on Wall
NOTE CONF
Club.
So if you haven't scanned the barcode now's the time.
NOTE CONF
Give you a few more seconds.
So let's think a little bit about the the ideas
NOTE CONF
we've just seen.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So something I haven't talked about is ambiguity.
NOTE CONF
So ambiguity means that a word can have more than
one meaning.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So we saw for example, a mouse could be a
NOTE CONF
computer device or a mammal.
But sentences can also be ambiguous.
NOTE CONF
A single sentence can have more than one meaning.
And here are some examples.
NOTE CONF
And I want you to look at these examples.
They're all ambiguous and think about the words in this
NOTE CONF
in this the sentence in each of the sentences and
tell me whether there's an ambiguous word in the sentence,
NOTE CONF
and that's what's causing the whole sentence to be ambiguous.
So you're supposed to pick the ones that contain ambiguous
NOTE CONF
words.
As opposed to.
NOTE CONF
Them.
So the sentences are.
NOTE CONF
I saw her duck.
I wrote a black horse in red pyjamas.
NOTE CONF
I saw the boy sitting on a bench with glasses.
She's looking for a match.
NOTE CONF
Parking.
Fine.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
How about that one?
NOTE CONF
The second.
Week.
NOTE CONF
I thought.
Okay, let's discuss the.
NOTE CONF
First of all.
Let's see the results.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Majority thinks that everything about sentence two is basically caused
by ambiguous lexical items.
NOTE CONF
Correct answer is one, four, and five.
Let's discuss each of them.
NOTE CONF
So I saw her duck.
Uh, what's the ambiguous word here?
NOTE CONF
Which word has two lexical entries here?
What do you think?
NOTE CONF
It's duck.
Right, because duck can be the animal, or it can
NOTE CONF
be the, uh, this motion of going down.
So clearly this is a duck that belongs to someone
NOTE CONF
or this is someone who's ducking.
Uh, second one was I wrote a black horse in
NOTE CONF
the red pyjamas.
So there isn't anything ambiguous here.
NOTE CONF
The words are not ambiguous, but it's the in the
red pyjamas that's ambiguous, right?
NOTE CONF
This could be referring to the horse wearing the red
pyjamas, or could refer to the speaker to the eye
NOTE CONF
Similar situation here.
I saw the boy sitting on the bench with glasses
NOTE CONF
so the glasses could refer to the bench, or they
could refer to the boy.
NOTE CONF
Obviously not very plausible with the bench.
So one reading is possible, but it's this preferred question.
NOTE CONF
Ambiguous because you could be like holding it could be
wearing it could be next to it.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
That's true.
NOTE CONF
So the question was that width could be ambiguous.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I guess that's another type of ambiguity here.
NOTE CONF
The truth is that most English words are ambiguous.
So it's it's actually hard to find examples where there's
NOTE CONF
really no ambiguity going on.
So with could be uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Referring to different manners of being close to someone or
something.
NOTE CONF
That's a good point.
She's looking for a match.
NOTE CONF
What is the ambiguity here?
So it's kind of about the the worst part.
NOTE CONF
Oh yeah.
Please.
NOTE CONF
I think it's maybe ambiguous in its meaning, but you
can't confuse it with another word.
NOTE CONF
There's no other word for it.
With like that has two definitions, but it only has
NOTE CONF
like one situation leaves.
Kind of like the meaning is different, but it's not
NOTE CONF
used as completely different things.
Like what's the verb in the knowledge?
NOTE CONF
That is a good point.
So even if we assume with this, ambiguity is ambiguous,
NOTE CONF
the ambiguity is different.
Duck is, as you said, it's ambiguous between the noun
NOTE CONF
and the verb.
Here the ambiguity is in match, but match is.
NOTE CONF
This is the with type of ambiguity.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Match could be, I don't know, playing a match or
someone who matches with you.
NOTE CONF
They're both nouns.
So we don't have the part of speech ambiguity.
NOTE CONF
It's a semantic ambiguity.
And here.
NOTE CONF
Parking.
Fine.
NOTE CONF
What's going on here?
What's the ambiguous thing?
NOTE CONF
So it's a bit more complicated here.
I mean, obviously, this could be a traffic warden and
NOTE CONF
tells you parking.
Fine.
NOTE CONF
So they're giving you a fine and then parking fine
is a compound noun.
NOTE CONF
Or it could be your mate helping you into the
into the parking spot.
NOTE CONF
And they say parking.
Fine, right?
NOTE CONF
So they're telling you that you parked really well, and
then fine is a separate word.
NOTE CONF
It's an adverb or something like that.
So here it depends really on the discourse context and
NOTE CONF
how you say it, what kind of meaning you get.
So yeah, I mean I'll skip this because we have
NOTE CONF
basically discussed this.
So here these are the same sentences again.
NOTE CONF
And now I'm asking about which ambiguity is caused by,
uh, by the, the rules rather than than the words
NOTE CONF
and.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
I was too fast here.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So here it's these two ambiguities.
NOTE CONF
The remaining ones are so-called syntactic ambiguities.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Where different rules are used to.
In one case, uh, the the prepositional phrase in red
NOTE CONF
pyjamas would be attached to the horse.
In the other case, it would be attached to eye
NOTE CONF
to the subject.
And here it's a similar ambiguity.
NOTE CONF
So here we are assuming the same words, the same
lexical entries, but they are combined in different ways.
NOTE CONF
So we assume we're using different rules.
So the first case.
NOTE CONF
This case here is called lexical ambiguity.
And the second case here is called syntactic ambiguity.
NOTE CONF
So two forms of creating more than one meaning.
Okay I have another quick one.
NOTE CONF
So let's try to connect things a little bit.
Yesterday I talked about cognitive modelling.
NOTE CONF
And we saw this taxonomy by a guest and Martin.
And now let's think about our grammar rules.
NOTE CONF
Where do they fall in this taxonomy.
Are they part of a framework.
NOTE CONF
Are they part of a theory.
Would there be a specification implementation hypothesis data.
NOTE CONF
What is the.
If I take a grammar rule like PNP goes to
NOTE CONF
determine a noun.
Where does this fall in in the taxonomy that we
NOTE CONF
saw yesterday.
So take a few moments to think about this and
NOTE CONF
vote.
Thanks for.
NOTE CONF
Joining us.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
So much for joining us.
Thank you so much for being with us.
NOTE CONF
We have to make.
Sure that.
NOTE CONF
There.
Is nothing.
NOTE CONF
Against this.
I know.
NOTE CONF
Okay, a few more votes, maybe.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So about half of you think it's a specification.
Um, let's look through the the answers in, uh, bit
NOTE CONF
by bit.
So is it a framework?
NOTE CONF
Mm.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Could be.
I mean, it could be part of a wider framework
NOTE CONF
because this idea that cognition is simple manipulation.
Right?
NOTE CONF
That you take bits of maths or bits of notation
and you shuffle symbols around.
NOTE CONF
That is actually a very old idea in cognitive science
going back to the 50s and 60s.
NOTE CONF
And obviously this is what's going on here.
You take a symbol like N and VP and you
NOTE CONF
combine and manipulate these symbols.
So overall this is probably part of this wider framework
NOTE CONF
of cognition as symbols.
However, here I've asked about an individual rule and that
NOTE CONF
on its own doesn't consider consists constitute a framework or
a theory as such, right?
NOTE CONF
Even a grammar with lots of rules would not be
a theory.
NOTE CONF
As such, you would need to link it to behaviour
in some way.
NOTE CONF
You would, for example, need to say I don't know.
Long rules are harder to process and take more time,
NOTE CONF
or infrequent words are more difficult to acquire and you
learn them later in life and so on.
NOTE CONF
So they would need to be some connection to cognition.
It cannot just be a list of lexical items and
NOTE CONF
and words specification.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that's pretty close I think, because it does specify
pretty precisely what you want to do.
NOTE CONF
Right.
In this case, constructing a noun phrase by taking a
NOTE CONF
determinant a noun and combining them.
So it's a bit like writing it down as a
NOTE CONF
formula or writing it down verbally, but in a in
a very precise way.
NOTE CONF
Implementation maybe could be an implementation.
You could put this onto a computer or a computer,
NOTE CONF
obviously parts programming languages all the time.
So they're actually good at.
NOTE CONF
And programming languages are specified by grammars similar to those.
So they're very good at taking a grammar and taking
NOTE CONF
some input and building up a syntax tree.
So it could be the basis of an implementation.
NOTE CONF
But as such it isn't an implementation yet.
It's not really hypothesis or data.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Data would be something that I need to get from
NOTE CONF
observing participants.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So specification was the correct answer.
And.
NOTE CONF
Uh okay.
So this.
NOTE CONF
Yes I'll come back to that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, a little bit of notation before we move on.
And this is something that will become useful for the
NOTE CONF
tutorial next week.
Um, so I've, I've written this as this little tree.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So a tree with just one branch or a larger,
NOTE CONF
bigger tree with two branches.
And these are often written as rules like this n
NOTE CONF
goes to rows where n is the the parent node
and rows the child node or s goes to NP,
NOTE CONF
where's is the parent node, and NP and V are
the children okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is notionally equivalent if you want to write
a tree in a compact way.
NOTE CONF
So this is the whole tree for the sentence that
we've seen.
NOTE CONF
You sometimes see this in terms of um this labelled
bracket notation.
NOTE CONF
So you can use the arrows only for trees of
depth one right where there's just one parent and one
NOTE CONF
or multiple children, but there aren't any grandchildren or grandparents.
So you would write this as a label, as a
NOTE CONF
sequence of labelled brackets.
So here this bracket means that this is the sentence
NOTE CONF
starting this bracket means it's the noun phrase starting the
determiner.
NOTE CONF
Then closing bracket denotes the end of the phrase, end
of the determiner, end of the noun, and here end
NOTE CONF
of the noun phrase, and so on.
So this is a bit harder to read, but more
NOTE CONF
compact.
And so syntactic means love this, they write.
NOTE CONF
Their structures like this here will mostly stick to the
tree structure, which is easier to read.
NOTE CONF
But as I said, this is something that will be
handy for the tutorial next week.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let's think a little bit about what we
can do with those rules.
NOTE CONF
We've so far seen a really simple grammar right?
We have seen this grammar which only has six rules.
NOTE CONF
But it turns out with a large enough lexicon, we
can actually generate tons of sentences even with a simple
NOTE CONF
grammar like this.
So note that the rules are productive.
NOTE CONF
They're abstract.
They're defined over types of words, kinds of words rather
NOTE CONF
than actual words.
Write these rules here.
NOTE CONF
The grammar rules, like s goes to noun phrase.
Verb phrase is, uh, agnostic about what kind of noun
NOTE CONF
or what kind of verb is in here.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So it abstracts away from that.
So and that means if I have if I learn
NOTE CONF
new words, I can stick them into the same rules
and generate more sentences.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we combine these these symbols in an abstract way.
NOTE CONF
And in fact there is a lot of combinations that
I can get, uh, just by sticking in different verbs
NOTE CONF
and nouns into the same set of rules.
We can calculate this fairly easily.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume we have four determiners.
Uh, obviously there's more, but it's a small set in
NOTE CONF
English, a set of determiners.
Whereas, of course, most languages have a ton of nouns
NOTE CONF
and a ton of verbs.
So let's assume we have 10,000 nouns and 4000 verbs.
NOTE CONF
And then our rule of PNP goes to determine a
noun would allow 40,000 noun phrases right for different determiners
NOTE CONF
and 10,000 nouns.
So we get 40,000 NPS.
NOTE CONF
Then our verb phrase rules uh, VP goes to verb
noun phrase.
NOTE CONF
We have our 40,000.
Or.
NOTE CONF
40,000 nouns and our 4000 verbs.
So that's already 160 million verb phrases.
NOTE CONF
And if we stick them together in a sentence, right,
160 million times 40,000, we get 6.4 trillion sentences.
NOTE CONF
Right?
And this is just by assuming those three rules and
NOTE CONF
obviously lots of, uh, a large lexicon, but not too
large.
NOTE CONF
Remember we said that once you're 18, you've acquired about
40,000 words.
NOTE CONF
Here we've only assumed 14, 14,004.
So this would just be a subset.
NOTE CONF
So in reality, of course, also the grammar is much
more complicated and doesn't contain only three rules.
NOTE CONF
It will contain hundreds or maybe thousands of rules.
So we can, uh, generate a really large number of
NOTE CONF
sentences, even with a simple grammar.
So that is why this is a nice modelling tool,
NOTE CONF
because it accounts for the productivity, for the fact that
we have this combinatorial power.
NOTE CONF
Um, we can easily utter a sentence that nobody has
uttered before.
NOTE CONF
Um, we can take an existing sentence and add an
adjective and create a new sentence that way and so
NOTE CONF
on.
So language is really very, very productive.
NOTE CONF
So um.
There is another trick.
NOTE CONF
So I've hopefully convinced you that we can generate lots
and lots of sentences, even from a simple grammar.
NOTE CONF
But can we generate infinitely many sentences?
Or do people think.
NOTE CONF
That would be even cooler, right?
If there wasn't an actual limit, and then we would
NOTE CONF
no longer be able to enumerate all the all the
possible sentences.
NOTE CONF
Do people think that's true?
Infinitely many sentences.
NOTE CONF
It's not with those rules, right?
We have actually calculated the 6.4 trillion.
NOTE CONF
And so that's not that's large but not infinite.
However, if we add another type of rule, a so-called
NOTE CONF
recursive rule.
So if you've if you if you've done Haskell last
NOTE CONF
semester, then you will have encountered recursion.
So the claim here is that human language also contains
NOTE CONF
recursion and a recursive rule.
If we stick with this notation or context free grammar,
NOTE CONF
notation would be a rule that has um that allows
the same rule to reoccur when it's applied.
NOTE CONF
So this here would be an example of a of
a recursive rule.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone see why, assuming we have the same sentence
rule that we had before?
NOTE CONF
Why does it lead to recursion?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You have in the sense of a noun phrases verb
phrase.
NOTE CONF
And since you define the phrase, I work closely with
work and that person has to go back to the
NOTE CONF
verb place.
And you have to not just keep going, keep up
NOTE CONF
the sentence.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
So you can turn the verb phrase into a sentence
and the sentence into a verb phrase using this rule
NOTE CONF
here.
Sorry, no sentence rule here.
NOTE CONF
These two rules together can, uh, alternate forever.
And so you can make a.
NOTE CONF
The sentence itself is not infinitely long, but you can
make infinitely many sentences.
NOTE CONF
And let's let's look at this in this example here.
So we start here with the sentence rule S goes
NOTE CONF
to NP.
Then we apply this rule up here verb phrase goes
NOTE CONF
to verb noun phrase and sentence.
So this will see an example.
NOTE CONF
This would be a subordinate sentence something like I told
Peter that I hated him.
NOTE CONF
Something like that.
This would be the next sentence here.
NOTE CONF
And then of course this sentence, by virtue of S
goes to NP, can generate another verb phrase.
NOTE CONF
And this verb phrase can then apply our rule up
here again.
NOTE CONF
Verb phrase goes to verb, noun phrase and sentence.
And then this again.
NOTE CONF
The sentence goes to noun phrase, verb phrase, and then
this verb phrase again constitutes another sentence, and so on.
NOTE CONF
At some point I need to stop speaking, right?
But I can make the sentence as long as I
NOTE CONF
would like.
And so this is called recursion.
NOTE CONF
We can think of cases where um.
In.
NOTE CONF
Simpler cases of recursion.
For example, if we have a rule like this a
NOTE CONF
goes to a and b, then this would already be
recursive, right?
NOTE CONF
Because A goes to itself, and I don't even need
another rule to.
NOTE CONF
Uh, to.
Generate an infinitely long sequence.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So this case is a bit less frequent in language.
NOTE CONF
In language you mostly have these cases, this case where
there's two rules that alternate and, uh, form recursion that
NOTE CONF
way.
And how plausible is this?
NOTE CONF
So let's look at an example.
Does this actually occur.
NOTE CONF
And this is um, uh, yeah.
So it's a rule that contains an entity that contains
NOTE CONF
an example of itself.
This is invertible.
NOTE CONF
If you want to verbalise this this is what's going
on.
NOTE CONF
So this is a um, a sentence that I've taken
from the book by Steven Pinker.
NOTE CONF
Words and rules.
That is actually part of this is the reading for
NOTE CONF
next week.
And this book is quite old and the example is
NOTE CONF
quite old.
Nobody here remembers Bill Clinton, but he was a US
NOTE CONF
president at some point, involved in lots of scandals.
And here's a sentence about that.
NOTE CONF
I think I'll tell you that I just read a
news story that recounts that.
NOTE CONF
Steven Brill reported that the press uncritically believed These kind
of stars announcement that Linda Tripp testified to him, that
NOTE CONF
Monica Lewinsky told Tripp that Bill Clinton told Vernon Jordan
to advise Lewinsky not to testify to Starr, that she
NOTE CONF
had sexual relationship with Clinton.
Okay, so this is exactly so this is not a
NOTE CONF
very elegant sentence, but it's definitely a possible sentence of
English.
NOTE CONF
And it has exactly the structure, right.
We have a sentence that consists of a noun phrase
NOTE CONF
and a verb phrase.
Then the verb phrase contains a subordinate clause.
NOTE CONF
So here, for example, I think I'll tell you that.
And this is our subordinate clause.
NOTE CONF
The story that this is a subordinate clause.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This is a bit more complicated because it's actually a
noun phrase, but it's the same principle reported that.
NOTE CONF
And then there's another sentence subordinate and so on.
And if you count it there's actually 12 sentences.
NOTE CONF
And actually this is sometimes attributed to Chomsky to having
realised that there's this.
NOTE CONF
Way of generating infinitely many sentences through recursion.
But the principle is actually older and has been realised
NOTE CONF
by things by people like Galileo or Descartes.
Humboldt.
NOTE CONF
As I said, the sentences themselves are not infinitely long,
but I can generate infinitely many sentences because I can
NOTE CONF
always apply the rule one more time and make a
longer sentence.
NOTE CONF
Okay, and this is a very interesting fact that obviously
is cognitively important.
NOTE CONF
So it's something we'll come back to okay.
Another short quiz.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Let's actually skip this because I'm a bit short.
In short, on time.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
False alarm.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's think about this in terms of what
it means from a cognitive point of view.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we seem to have this unlimited expressive power where
NOTE CONF
we can generate an unlimited number of sentences, and we
can express things that nobody has said before and think,
NOTE CONF
hopefully also express thoughts that nobody has thought before.
And um, so it's the words, but also the combinations
NOTE CONF
and the words are in the lexicon.
The combinations are in these grammar rules.
NOTE CONF
And how does this, uh, how does this work out
in cognitive terms?
NOTE CONF
So you could argue that the words they live in
memory and the rules are processes are forms of computation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you remember in the first lecture we talked about
NOTE CONF
mental representations and mental processes.
So in this very simple story with just two components,
NOTE CONF
you could say the words.
They're the representations they live in, in a memory.
NOTE CONF
They are stored.
And the rules are the processes.
NOTE CONF
They're sort of little algorithms, little computational procedures okay.
And now of course we need to find out is
NOTE CONF
this actually true.
Are there these two mechanisms.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe there's just a single mechanism that can do
both things.
NOTE CONF
And just on the surface it looks like there's there's
words and rules.
NOTE CONF
And this is again something that we will return back
to.
NOTE CONF
Another interesting thing is how does this relate to the
to the rest of the language system.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we talked about the lexicon where the words live.
NOTE CONF
We talked about morphology, which is uh, we didn't really
talk about morphology, but morphology is also rules.
NOTE CONF
And we talked about syntax which are particular rules.
But of course these in itself are not very useful.
NOTE CONF
They need to interface with our mouths and ears, right?
So that we understand and generate language.
NOTE CONF
And they need to interface with the rest of the
cognitive systems system, where we understand where we have desires
NOTE CONF
and beliefs and we express ideas and so on.
So they need to interface with the semantics as well.
NOTE CONF
So at the moment we've only talked about the middle,
middle part here.
NOTE CONF
And we'll come back to morphology actually in the next
in the next lecture.
NOTE CONF
Before we go here is one important distinction that I
would quickly like to get across.
NOTE CONF
So um, and it's sort of implicit in, in this
idea here that, you know, linguists say we'll talk about
NOTE CONF
words and rules where psychologists or cognitive scientists would think
about the memory and the computation.
NOTE CONF
And how does this actually work, uh, when we need
to generate sentences or understand sentences.
NOTE CONF
And this corresponds to the distinction between words as morphological
objects, so as things that are composed out of different
NOTE CONF
parts and words as the content of memory, a stretch
of sounds that is memorised and would not be generated
NOTE CONF
by a rule.
And Pinker, as I said, reading for next week, calls
NOTE CONF
this a list theme, right?
It's basically, if you think of the lexicon in very
NOTE CONF
simple terms as a list, then everything that is listed
that is memorised would be a word.
NOTE CONF
And sometimes the memorised chunks are smaller than words in
the linguistic sense, sometimes are larger.
NOTE CONF
So for example, if we think of suffixes or prefixes
like able or un or co, then these are probably
NOTE CONF
uh, they need to be stored somewhere.
So there would be list items in pinker sense, even
NOTE CONF
though they're not words.
Right?
NOTE CONF
A linguist will tell you these are morphemes.
They are not words, they're just parts of words.
NOTE CONF
But we need to memorise them separately.
Otherwise we couldn't use them in rules or things like
NOTE CONF
idioms.
Piece of cake.
NOTE CONF
Once in a blue moon.
The last straw.
NOTE CONF
These are things that don't mean anything literally, right?
So a piece of cake means something is easy.
NOTE CONF
It's not literally a piece of cake.
You can't eat it.
NOTE CONF
So presumably I need to store this as a string.
Right?
NOTE CONF
To remember the meaning of a piece of cake.
Or last straw.
NOTE CONF
And again, linguists would say, well, these are individual words.
They're not they're not stored as a string.
NOTE CONF
But a psychologist probably would add it to the list
team and would say, this is stored as a string.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So important that the words that we recognise linguistically, they're
NOTE CONF
sometimes bigger or smaller than the words that we recognise
in psychology.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm out of time.
This is just a summary of today's lecture.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.